<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>One Phase of American Literature</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:non-fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="title">One Phase of American Literature</h3>
			<p>For nations as for individuals, a product, to be worthy the term literature, must contain something characteristic and sui generis.</p>
			<p>So long as America remained a mere English colony, drawing all her life and inspiration from the mother country, it may well be questioned whether there was such a thing as American literature. “Who ever reads an American book?” it was scornfully asked in the eighteenth century. Imitation is the worst of suicides; it cuts the nerve of originality and condemns to mediocrity: and ’twas not till the pen of our writers was dipped in the lifeblood of their own nation and pictured out its own peculiar heartthrobs and agonies that the world cared to listen. The nightingale and the skylark had to give place to the mockingbird, the bobolink and the whippoorwill, the heather and the bluebells of Britain, to our own goldenrod and daisy; the insular and monarchic customs and habits of thought of old England must develop into the broader, looser, freer swing of democratic America, before her contributions to the world of thought could claim the distinction of individuality and gain an appreciative hearing.</p>
			<p>And so our writers have succeeded in becoming national and representative in proportion as they have from year to year entered more and more fully, and more and more sympathetically, into the distinctive life of their nation, and endeavored to reflect and picture its homeliest pulsations and its elemental components. And so in all the arts, as men have gradually come to realize that</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>Nothing useless is or low</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Each thing in its place is best,</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">and have wrought into their products, lovingly and impartially and reverently, every type, every tint, every tone that they felt or saw or heard, just to that degree have their expressions, whether by pen or brush or rhythmic cadence, adequately and simply given voice to the thought of Nature around them. No man can prophesy with another’s parable. For each of us truth means merely the representation of the sensations and experiences of our personal environment, colored and vivified⁠—fused into consistency and crytallized into individuality in the crucible of our own feelings and imaginations. The mind of genius is merely the brook, picturing back its own tree and bush and bit of sky and cloud ensparkled by individual salts and sands and rippling motion. And paradoxical as it may seem, instead of making us narrow and provincial, this trueness to one’s habitat, this appreciative eye and ear for the tints and voices of one’s own little wood serves but to usher us into the eternal galleries and choruses of God. It is only through the unclouded perception of our tiny “part” that we can come to harmonize with the “stupendous whole,” and in order to do this our sympathies must be finely attuned and quick to vibrate under the touch of the commonplace and vulgar no less than at the hand of the elegant and refined. Nothing natural can be wholly unworthy; and we do so at our peril, if, what God has cleansed we presume to call common or unclean. Nature’s language is not writ in cipher. Her notes are always simple and sensuous, and the very meanest recesses and commonest byways are fairly deafening with her sermons and songs. It is only when we ourselves are out of tune through our pretentiousness and self-sufficiency, or are blinded and rendered insensate by reason of our foreign and unnatural “cultivation” that we miss her meanings and inadequately construe her multiform lessons.</p>
			<p>For two hundred and fifty years there was in the American commonwealth a great <em>silent</em> factor. Though in themselves simple and unique their offices were those of the barest utility. Imported merely to be hewers of wood and drawers of water, no artist for many a generation thought them worthy the sympathetic study of a model. No Shakespeare arose to distil from their unmatched personality and unparalleled situations the exalted poesy and crude grandeur of an immortal Caliban. Distinct in color, original in temperament, simple and unconventionalized in thought and action their spiritual development and impressionability under their novel environment would have furnished, it might seem, as interesting a study in psychology for the poetic pen, as would the gorges of the Yosemite to the inspired pencil. Full of vitality and natural elasticity, the severest persecution and oppression could not kill them out or even sour their temper. With massive brawn and indefatigable endurance they wrought under burning suns and chilling blasts, in swamps and marshes⁠—they cleared the forests, tunneled mountains, threaded the land with railroads, planted, picked and ginned the cotton, produced the rice and the sugar for the markets of the world. Without money and without price they poured their hearts’ best blood into the enriching and developing of this country. <em>They wrought but were silent.</em></p>
			<p>The most talked about of all the forces in this diversified civilization, they seemed the great American fact, the one objective reality, on which scholars sharpened their wits, at which orators and statesmen fired their eloquence, and from which, after so long a time, authors, with varied success and truthfulness have begun at last to draw subjects and models. Full of imagination and emotion, their sensuous pictures of the “New Jerusalem,” “the golden slippers,” “the long white robe,” “the pearly gates,” <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, seem fairly to steam with tropical luxuriance and naive abandon. The paroxysms of religious fervor into which this simple-minded, childlike race were thrown by the contemplation of Heaven and rest and freedom, would have melted into sympathy and tender pity if not into love, a race less cold and unresponsive than the one with which they were thrown in closest contact. There was something truly poetic in their weird moanings, their fitful gleams of hope and trust, flickering amidst the darkness of their wailing helplessness, their strange sad songs, the half coherent ebullitions of souls in pain, which become, the more they are studied, at once the wonder and the despair of musical critics and imitators. And if one had the insight and the simplicity to gather together, to digest and assimilate these original lispings of an unsophisticated people while they were yet close⁠—so close⁠—to nature and to nature’s God, there is material here, one might almost believe, as rich, as unhackneyed, as original and distinctive as ever inspired a Homer, or a Caedmon or other simple genius of a people’s infancy and lisping childhood.</p>
			<p>In the days of their bitterest persecution, their patient endurance and Christian manliness inspired <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Uncle Tom’s Cabin</i>, which revolutionized the thought of the world on the subject of slavery and at once placed its author in the front rank of the writers of her country and age. Here at last was a work which England could not parallel. Here was a work indigenous to American soil and characteristic of the country⁠—a work which American forces alone could have produced. The subject was at once seen to be fresh and interesting to the world as well as national and peculiar to America; and so it has since been eagerly cultivated by later writers with widely varying degrees of fitness and success.</p>
			<p>By a rough classification, authors may be separated into two groups: first, those in whom the artistic or poetic instinct is uppermost⁠—those who write to please⁠—or rather who write because <em>they</em> please; who simply paint what they see, as naturally, as instinctively, and as irresistibly as the bird sings⁠—with no thought of an audience⁠—singing because it loves to sing⁠—singing because God, nature, truth sings through it. For such writers, to be true to themselves and true to Nature is the only canon. They cannot warp a character or distort a fact in order to prove a point. They have nothing to prove. All who care to, may listen while they make the woods resound with their glad sweet carolling; and the listeners may draw their own conclusions as to the meaning of the cadences of this minor strain, or that hushed and almost awful note of rage or despair. And the myriad-minded multitude attribute their myriad-fold impressions to the myriad-minded soul by which they have severally been enchanted, each in his own way according to what he brings to the witching auditorium. But the singer sings on with his hat before his face, unmindful, it may be unconscious, of the varied strains reproduced from him in the multitudinous echoes of the crowd. Such was Shakespeare, such was George Eliot, such was Robert Browning. Such, in America, was Poe, was Bryant, was Longfellow; and such, in his own degree perhaps, is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells.</p>
			<p>In the second group belong the preachers⁠—whether of righteousness or unrighteousness⁠—all who have an idea to propagate, no matter in what form their talent enables them to clothe it, whether poem, novel, or sermon⁠—all those writers with a purpose or a lesson, who catch you by the buttonhole and pommel you over the shoulder till you are forced to give assent in order to escape their vociferations; or they may lure you into listening with the soft music of the siren’s tongue⁠—no matter what the expedient to catch and hold your attention, they mean to fetter you with their one idea, whatever it is, and make you, if possible, ride their hobby. In this group I would place Milton in much of his writing, Carlyle in all of his, often our own Whittier, the great reformer-poet, and Lowell; together with such novelists as <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">E. P.</abbr> Roe, Bellamy, Tourgee and some others.</p>
			<p>Now in my judgment writings of the first class will be the ones to withstand the ravages of time. “Isms” have their day and pass away. New necessities arise with new conditions and the emphasis has to be shifted to suit the times. No finite mind can grasp and give out the whole circle of truth. We do well if we can illuminate just the tiny arc which we occupy and should be glad that the next generation will not need the lessons we try so assiduously to hammer into this. In the evolution of society, as the great soul of humanity builds it “more lofty chambers,” the old shell and slough of didactic teaching must be left behind and forgotten. The world for instance has outgrown, I suspect, those passages of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paradise Lost</i> in which Milton makes the Almighty Father propound the theology of a seventeenth century Presbyterian. But a passage like the one in which Eve with guileless innocence describes her first sensations on awaking into the world is as perennial as man.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“That day I oft remember, when from sleep</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I first awaked and found myself reposed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And what I was, whence thither brought and how.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of waters issued from a cave, and spread</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Into a liquid plain, then stood unmoved</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pure as the expanse of Heaven;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">I thither went</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With unexperienced thought and laid me down</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On the green bank, to look into the clear</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Smooth lake that to me seemed another sky.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>As I bent down to look, just opposite</span>
					<br/>
					<span>A shape within the watery gleam appeared,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Bending to look on me; I started back,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>It started back; but pleased I soon returned,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Of sympathy and love; there I had fixed</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mine eyes till now⁠—and pined with vain desire,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Had not a voice thus warned me.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">‘What thou seest,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>What there thou seest, fair creature, is thyself;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With thee it came and goes; but follow me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And I will bring thee where no shadow stays</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thy coming and thy soft embraces.’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">What could I do but follow straight</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Invisibly thus led?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Till I espied thee, fair indeed and tall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Under a plantain; yet methought less fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Less winning soft, less amiably mild</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than that smooth watery image; back I turned</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thou following criedst aloud, ‘Return, fair Eve,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Whom fliest thou? whom thou fliest, of him thou art.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Part of my soul, I seek thee, and thee claim</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My other half.’ ”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">This will never cease to throb and thrill as long as man is man and woman is woman.</p>
			<p>Now owing to the problematical position at present occupied by descendants of Africans in the American social polity⁠—growing, I presume, out of the continued indecision in the mind of the more powerful descendants of the Saxons as to whether it is expedient to apply the maxims of their religion to their civil and political relationships⁠—most of the writers who have hitherto attempted a portrayal of life and customs among the darker race have belonged to our class <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>: they have all, more or less, had a point to prove or a mission to accomplish, and thus their art has been almost uniformly perverted to serve their ends; and, to add to their disadvantage, most, if not all the writers on this line have been but partially acquainted with the life they wished to delineate and through sheer ignorance ofttimes, as well as from design occasionally, have not been able to put themselves in the darker man’s place. The art of “thinking one’s self imaginatively into the experiences of others” is not given to all, and it is impossible to acquire it without a background and a substratum of sympathetic knowledge. Without this power our portraits are but death’s heads or caricatures and no amount of cudgeling can put into them the movement and reality of life. Not many have had <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stowe’s power because not many have studied with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stowe’s humility and love. They forget that underneath the black man’s form and behavior there is the great bedrock of humanity, the key to which is the same that unlocks every tribe and kindred of the nations of earth. Some have taken up the subject with a view to establishing evidences of ready formulated theories and preconceptions; and, blinded by their prejudices and antipathies, have altogether abjured all candid and careful study. Others with flippant indifference have performed a few psychological experiments on their cooks and coachmen, and with astounding egotism, and powers of generalization positively bewildering, forthwith aspire to enlighten the world with dissertations on racial traits of the Negro. A few with really kind intentions and a sincere desire for information have approached the subject as a clumsy microscopist, not quite at home with his instrument, might study a new order of beetle or bug. Not having focused closely enough to obtain a clear-cut view, they begin by telling you that all colored people look exactly alike and end by noting down every chance contortion or idiosyncrasy as a race characteristic. Some of their conclusions remind one of the enterprising German on a tour of research and self-improvement through Great Britain, who recommended his favorite sauerkraut both to an Irishman, whom he found sick with fever, and to a Scotchman, who had a cold. On going that way subsequently and finding the Scotchman well and the Irishman dead, he writes: <em>Mem.⁠—Sauerkraut good for the Scotch but death to the Irish</em>.</p>
			<p>This criticism is not altered by our grateful remembrance of those who have heroically taken their pens to champion the black man’s cause. But even here we may remark that a painter may be irreproachable in motive and as benevolent as an angel in intention, nevertheless we have a right to compare his copy with the original and point out in what respects it falls short or is overdrawn; and he should thank us for doing so.</p>
			<p>It is in no captious spirit, therefore, that we note a few contributions to this phase of American literature which have been made during the present decade; we shall try to estimate their weight, their tendency, their truthfulness and their lessons, if any, for ourselves.</p>
			<p>Foremost among the champions of the black man’s cause through the medium of fiction must be mentioned Albion <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">W.</abbr> Tourgee. No man deserves more the esteem and appreciation of the colored people of this country for his brave words. For ten years he has stood almost alone as the enthusiastic advocate, not of charity and dole to the Negro, but of justice. The volumes he has written upon the subject have probably been read by from five to ten millions of the American people. Look over his list consecrated to one phase or another of the subject: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Fool’s Errand</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">A Royal Gentleman</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Bricks without Straw</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">An Appeal to Caesar</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Hot Ploughshares</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pactolus Prime</i>,⁠—over three thousand pages⁠—enough almost for a life work, besides an almost interminable quantity published in periodicals.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tourgee essays to paint life with the coloring of fiction, and yet, we must say, we do not think him a novelist primarily; that is, novel making with him seems to be a mere incident, a convenient vehicle through which to convey those burning thoughts which he is constantly trying to impress upon the people of America, whether in lecture, stump speech, newspaper column or magazine article. His power is not that already referred to of thinking himself imaginatively into the experiences of others. He does not create many men of many minds. All his offspring are little Tourgees⁠—they preach his sermons and pray his prayers.</p>
			<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pactolus Prime</i>, for example, one of his latest, his hero, a colored bootblack in a large hotel, is none other than the powerful, impassioned, convinced and convincing lecturer, Judge Tourgee himself, done over in ebony. His caustic wit, his sledgehammer logic, his incisive criticism, his righteous indignation, all reflect the irresistible arguments of the great pleader for the Negro; and all the incidents are arranged to enable this bootblack to impress on senators and judges, lawyers, and divines, his plea for justice to the Negro, along with the blacking and shine which he skillfully puts on their aristocratic toes. And so with all the types which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tourgee presents⁠—worthy or pitiful ones always⁠—they uniformly preach or teach, convict or convert. Artistic criticism aside, it is mainly as a contribution to polemic literature in favor of the colored man that most of Tourgee’s works will be judged; and we know of no one who can more nearly put himself in the Negro’s place in resenting his wrongs and pleading for his rights. In presenting truth from the colored American’s standpoint <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tourgee excels, we think, in fervency and frequency of utterance any living writer, white or colored. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cable is brave and just. He wishes to see justice done in the Freedman’s case in equity, and we honor and revere him for his earnest manly efforts towards that end. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cable does not forget (I see no reason why he should, of course,) that he is a white man, a Southerner and an ex-soldier in the Confederate army. To use his own words, he writes, “with an admiration and affection for the South, that for justice and sincerity yield to none; in a spirit of faithful sonship to a Southern state.” Of course this but proves his sincerity, illustrates his candor, and adds weight to the axiomatic justice of a cause which demands such support from a thoroughly disinterested party, or rather a party whose interest and sympathy and affection must be all on the side he criticises and condemns. The passion of the partisan and the bias of the aggrieved can never be charged against him. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cable’s is the impartiality of the judge who condemns his own son or cuts off his own arm. His attitude is judicial, convincing, irreproachable throughout.</p>
			<p>Not only the Christian conscience of the South, but also its enlightened self-interest is unquestionably on the side of justice and manly dealing toward the black man; and one can not help feeling that a cause which thus enlists the support and advocacy of the “better self” of a nation must ultimately be invincible: and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cable, in my judgment, embodies and represents that Christian conscience and enlightened self-interest of the hitherto silent South; he vocalizes and inspires its better self. To him the dishonesty and inhumanity there practiced against the black race is a blot on the scutcheon of that fair land and doomed to bring in its wake untold confusion, disaster, and disgrace. From his calm elevation he sees the impending evil, and with loving solicitude urges his countrymen to flee the wrath to come. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tourgee, on the other hand, speaks with all the eloquence and passion of the aggrieved party himself. With his whip of fine cords he pitilessly scourges the inconsistencies, the weaknesses and pettiness of the black man’s persecutors. The fire is burning within him, he cannot but speak. He has said himself that he deserves no credit for speaking and writing on this subject, for it has taken hold of him and possesses him to the exclusion of almost everything else. Necessity is laid upon him. Not more bound was Saul of Tarsus to consecrate his fiery eloquence to the cause of the persecuted Nazarene than is this white man to throw all the weight of his powerful soul into the plea for justice and Christianity in this American anomaly and huge inconsistency. Not many colored men would have attempted Tourgee’s brave defense of Reconstruction and the alleged corruption of Negro supremacy, more properly termed the period of white sullenness and desertion of duty. Not many would have dared, fearlessly as he did, to arraign this country for an enormous pecuniary debt to the colored man for the two hundred and forty-seven years of unpaid labor of his ancestors. Not many could so determinedly have held up the glass of the real Christianity before these believers in a white Christ and these preachers of the gospel, “Suffer the little <em>white</em> children to come unto me.” We all see the glaring inconsistency and feel the burning shame. We appreciate the incongruity and the indignity of having to stand forever hat in hand as beggars, or be shoved aside as intruders in a country whose resources have been opened up by the unrequited toil of our forefathers. We know that our bill is a true one⁠—that the debt is as real as to any pensioners of our government. But the principles of patience and forbearance, of meekness and charity, have become so ingrained in the Negro character that there is hardly enough self-assertion left to ask as our right that a part of the country’s surplus wealth be <em>loaned</em> for the education of our children; even though we know that our present poverty is due to the fact that the toil of the last quarter century enriched these coffers, but left us the heirs of crippled, deformed, frostbitten, horny-handed and empty handed mothers and fathers. Oh, the shame of it!</p>
			<p>A coward during the war gets a few scratches and bruises⁠—often in <em>fleeing from the enemy</em>⁠—and his heirs are handsomely pensioned by his <em>grateful</em> country! But these poor wretches stood every man to his post for two hundred and fifty years, digging trenches, building roads, tunneling mountains, clearing away forests, cultivating the soil in the cotton fields and rice swamps till fingers dropped off, toes were frozen, knees twisted, arms stiff and useless⁠—and when their sons and heirs, with the burdens of helpless parents to support, wish to secure enough education to enable them to make a start in life, <em>their</em> grateful country sagely deliberates as to the feasibility of sending them to another undeveloped jungle to show off their talent for unlimited pioneer work in strange climes! The Indian, during the entire occupancy of this country by white men, has stood proudly aloof from all their efforts at development, and presented an unbroken front of hostility to the introduction and spread of civilization. The Negro, though brought into the country by force and compelled under the lash to lend his brawn and sturdy sinews to promote its material growth and prosperity, nevertheless with perfect amiability of temper and adaptability of mental structure has quietly and unhesitatingly accepted its standards and fallen in line with its creeds. He adjusts himself just as readily and as appreciatively, it would seem, to the higher and stricter requirements of freedom and citizenship; and although from beginning to end, nettled and goaded under unprecedented provocation, he has never once shown any general disposition to arise in his might and deluge this country with blood or desolate it with burning, as he might have done. It is no argument to charge weakness as the cause of his peaceful submission and to sneer at the “inferiority” of a race who would allow themselves to be made slaves⁠—unrevenged. It <em>may</em> be nobler to perish red-handed, to kill as many as your battle-axe holds out to hack and then fall with an exultant yell and savage grin of fiendish delight on the huge pile of bloody corpses⁠—expiring with the solace and unction of having ten thousand wounds all in front. I don’t know. I sometimes think it depends on where you plant your standard and who wears the white plume which your eye inadvertently seeks. If Napoleon is the ideal of mankind, I suppose ’tis only noble to be strong; and true greatness may consist in an adamantine determination never to serve. The greatest race with which I am even partially acquainted, proudly boasts that it has never met another race save as either enemy or victim. They seem to set great store by this fact and I judge it must be immensely noble according to their ideals. But somehow it seems to me that those nations and races who choose the Nazarene for their plumed knight would find some little jarring and variance between such notions and His ideals. There could not be at all times perfect unanimity between Leader and host. A good many of his sayings, it seems to me, would have to be explained away; not a few of his injunctions quietly ignored, and I am not sure but the great hulk of his principles and precepts must after all lie like leaden lumps, an undigested and unassimilable mass on an uneasy overburdened stomach. I find it rather hard to understand these things, and somehow I feel at times as if I have taken hold of the wrong ideal. But then, I suppose, it must be because I have not enough of the spirit that comes with the blood of those grand old <em>sea kings</em> (I believe you call them) who shot out in their trusty barks speeding over unknown seas and, like a death-dealing genius, with the piercing eye and bloodthirsty heart of hawk or vulture killed and harried, burned and caroused. This is doubtless all very glorious and noble, and the seed of it must be an excellent thing to have in one’s blood. But I haven’t it. I frankly admit my limitations. I am hardly capable of appreciating to the full such grand intrepidity⁠—due of course to the fact that the stock from which I am sprung did not attain that royal kink in its blood ages ago. My tribe has to own kinship with a very tame and unsanguinary individual who, a long time ago when blue blood was a distilling in the stirring fiery world outside, had no more heroic and daring a thing to do than help a pale sorrow-marked man as he was toiling up a certain hill at Jerusalem bearing his own cross whereon he was soon to be ignominiously nailed. This Cyrenian fellow was used to bearing burdens and he didn’t mind giving a lift over a hard place now and then, with no idea of doing anything grand or memorable, or that even so much as his name would be known thereby. And then, too, by a rather strange coincidence this unwarlike and insignificant kinsman of ours had his home in a country (the fatherland of all the family) which had afforded kindly shelter to that same mysterious Stranger, when, a babe and persecuted by bloody power and heartless jealousy, He had to flee the land of his birth. And somehow this same country has in its day done so much fostering and sheltering of that kind⁠—has watched and hovered over the cradles of religions and given refuge and comfort to the persecuted, the world weary, the storm tossed benefactors of mankind so often that she has come to represent nothing stronger or more imposing than the “eternal womanly” among the nations, and to accept as her mission and ideal, <em>loving service</em> to mankind.</p>
			<p>With such antecedents then the black race in America should not be upbraided for having no taste for blood and carnage. It is the fault of their constitution that they prefer the judicial awards of peace and have an eternal patience to abide the bloodless triumph of right. It is no argument, therefore, when I point to the record of their physical supremacy⁠—when the homes and helpless ones of this country were absolutely at the black man’s mercy and not a town laid waste, not a building burned, and <em>not a woman insulted</em>⁠—it is no argument, I say, for you to retort: “<em>He was a coward; he didn’t dare!</em>” The facts simply do not show this to have been the case.</p>
			<p>Now the tardy conscience of the nation wakes up one bright morning and is overwhelmed with blushes and stammering confusion because convicted of dishonorable and unkind treatment of <em>the Indian</em>; and there is a wonderful scurrying around among the keepers of the keys to get out more blankets and send out a few primers for the “<em>wards</em>.” While the black man, a faithful son and indefeasible heir⁠—who can truthfully say, “Lo, these many years do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment, and yet thou never gavest me a kid that I might make merry with my friends,”⁠—is snubbed and chilled and made unwelcome at every merrymaking of the family. And when appropriations for education are talked of, the section for which he has wrought and suffered most, actually defeats the needed and desired assistance for fear they may not be able to prevent his getting a fair and equitable share in the distribution.</p>
			<p>Oh, the shame of it!</p>
			<p>In <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Pactolus Prime</i> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tourgee has succeeded incomparably, we think, in photographing and vocalizing the feelings of the colored American in regard to the Christian profession and the pagan practice of the dominant forces in the American government. And as an impassioned denunciation of the heartless and godless spirit of caste founded on color, as a scathing rebuke to weak-eyed Christians who cannot read the golden rule across the color line, as an unanswerable arraignment of unparalleled ingratitude and limping justice in the policy of this country towards the weaker of its two children, that served it so long and so faithfully, the book is destined to live and to furnish an invaluable contribution to this already plethoric department of American literature.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Cable and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Tourgee represent possibly the most eminent as well as the most prolific among the writers on this subject belonging to the didactic or polemic class. A host of others there are⁠—lesser lights, or of more intermittent coruscations⁠—who have contributed on either side the debate single treatises, numerous magazine articles or newspaper editorials, advocating some one theory some another on the so-called <em>race problem</em>. In this group belongs the author of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">An Appeal to Pharaoh</i>, advocating the deportation absurdity; also the writings of <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">H. W.</abbr> Grady; “In Plain Black and White,” <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Brother in Black</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The South Investigated</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">A Defense of the Negro Race</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Prosperity of the South Dependent on the Elevation of the Negro</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The Old South and the New</i>, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Black and White</i>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, <abbr>etc.</abbr>, among which are included articles from the pen of colored men themselves, such as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Douglass, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Crummell, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Arnett, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Blyden, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Scarborough, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Price, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Fortune, and others. These are champions of the forces on either side. They stand ever at the forefront dealing desperate blows right and left, now fist and skull, now broadsword and battle-axe, now with the flash and boom of artillery; while the little fellows run out ever and anon from the ranks and deliver a telling blow between the eyes of an antagonist. All are wrought up to a high tension, some are blinded with passion, others appalled with dread⁠—all sincerely feel the reality of their own vision and earnestly hope to compel their world to see with their eyes. Such works, full of the fever and heat of debate belong to the turmoil and turbulence of the time. A hundred years from now they may be interesting history, throwing light on a feature of these days which, let us hope, will then be hardly intelligible to an American citizen not over fifty years old.</p>
			<p>Among our artists for art’s sweet sake, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells has recently tried his hand also at painting the Negro, attempting merely a side light in half tones, on his life and manners; and I think the unanimous verdict of the subject is that, in this single department at least, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells does not know what he is talking about. And yet I do not think we should quarrel with <cite>An Imperative Duty</cite> because it lacks the earnestness and bias of a special pleader. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells merely meant to press the button and give one picture from American life involving racial complications. The kodak does no more; it cannot preach sermons or solve problems.</p>
			<p>Besides, the portrayal of Negro characteristics was by no means the main object of the story, which was rather meant, I judge, to be a thumbnail sketch containing a psychological study of a morbidly sensitive conscience hectoring over a weak and vacillating will and fevered into increased despotism by reading into its own life and consciousness the analyses and terrible retributions of fiction⁠—a product of the Puritan’s uncompromising sense of “<em>right though the heavens fall</em>,” irritated and kept sore by being unequally yoked with indecision and cowardice. Of such strokes <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells is undoubtedly master. It is true there is little point and no force of character about the beautiful and irresponsible young heroine; but as that is an attainment of so many of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells’ models, it is perhaps not to be considered as illustrating any racial characteristics. I cannot help sharing, however, the indignation of those who resent the picture in the colored church⁠—“evidently,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells assures us, “representing <em>the best colored society</em>”; where the horrified young prig, Rhoda Aldgate, meets nothing but the frog-like countenances and catfish mouths, the musky exhalations and the “bress de Lawd, Honey,” of an uncultivated people. It is just here that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells fails⁠—and fails because he gives only a half truth, and that a partisan half truth. One feels that he had no business to attempt a subject of which he knew so little, or for which he cared so little. There is one thing I would like to say to my white fellow countrymen, and especially to those who dabble in ink and affect to discuss the Negro; and yet I hesitate because I feel it is a fact which persons of the finer sensibilities and more delicate perceptions must know instinctively: namely, that it is an insult to humanity and a sin against God to publish any such sweeping generalizations of a race on such meager and superficial information. We meet it at every turn⁠—this obtrusive and offensive vulgarity, this gratuitous sizing up of the Negro and conclusively writing down his equation, sometimes even among his ardent friends and bravest defenders. Were I not afraid of falling myself into the same error that I am condemning, I would say it seems an <em>Anglo-Saxon characteristic</em> to have such overweening confidence in his own power of induction that there is no equation which he would acknowledge to be indeterminate, however many unknown quantities it may possess.</p>
			<p>Here is an extract from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Mayo, a thoroughly earnest man and sincerely friendly, as I believe, to the colored people.</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Among these women are as many grades of native, intellectual, moral and executive force as among the white people. The plantations of the Gulf, the Atlantic coast and the Mississippi bottoms swarm with negro women who seem hardly lifted above the brutes. I know a group of young colored women, many of them accomplished teachers, who bear themselves as gently and with as varied womanly charms as any score of ladies in the land. The one abyss of perdition <em>to this class</em> is the slough of unchastity in which, <em>as a race</em> they still flounder, half conscious that it is a slough⁠—the double inheritance of savage Africa and slavery.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Now there may be one side of a truth here, yet who but a self-confident Anglo-Saxon would dare make such a broad unblushing statement about a people <em>as a race</em>? Some developments brought to light recently through the scientific Christianity and investigating curiosity of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Parkhurst may lead one to suspect the need of missionary teaching to “elevate” the white race; and yet I have too much respect for the autonomy of races, too much reverence for the collective view of God’s handiwork to speak of any such condition, however general, as characterizing <em>the race</em>. The colored people do not object to the adequate and truthful portrayal of types of their race in whatever degree of the scale of civilization, or of social and moral development, is consonant with actual facts or possibilities. As <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells himself says, “A man can be anything along the vast range from angel to devil, and without living either the good thing or the bad thing in which his fancy dramatizes him, he can perceive it”⁠—and I would add, can appreciate and even enjoy its delineation by the artist. The average Englishman takes no exception to the humorous caricatures of Dickens or to the satires and cynicisms of Thackeray. The Quilps and the Bernsteins are but strongly developed negatives of our universal human nature on the dark side. We recognize them as genre sketches⁠—and with the Agneses and Esthers and Aunt Lamberts as foils and correctives, we can appreciate them accordingly: while we do not believe ourselves to be the original of the portrait, there is enough sympathy and fellow feeling for the character to prevent our human relationship from being outraged and insulted. But were Dickens to introduce an average scion of his countrymen to a whole congregation of <em>Quilps</em>, at the same time sagely informing him that these represented <em>the best there was</em> of English life and morals, I strongly suspect the charming author would be lifted out on the toe of said average Englishman’s boot, in case there shouldn’t happen to be a good horsewhip handy.</p>
			<p>Our grievance then is not that we are not painted as angels of light or as goody-goody Sunday-school developments; but we do claim that a man whose acquaintanceship is so slight that he cannot even discern diversities of individuality, has no right or authority to hawk “the only true and authentic” pictures of a race of human beings. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells’ point of view is precisely that of a white man who sees colored people at long range or only in certain capacities. His conclusions about the colored man are identical with the impressions that will be received and carried abroad by foreigners from all parts of the globe, who shall attend our Columbian Exposition for instance, and who, through the impartiality and generosity of our white countrymen, will see colored persons only as bootblacks and hotel waiters, grinning from ear to ear and bowing and courtesying for the extra tips. In the same way <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells has met colored persons in hotels or on the commons promenading and sparking, or else acting as menials and lazzaroni. He has not seen, and therefore cannot be convinced that there exists a quiet, self-respecting, dignified class of easy life and manners (save only where it crosses the roughness of their white fellow countrymen’s barbarity) of cultivated tastes and habits, and with no more in common with the class of his acquaintance than the accident of complexion⁠—beyond a sympathy with their wrongs, or a resentment at being socially and morally classified with them, according as the principle of altruism or of self love is dominant in the individual.</p>
			<p>I respectfully submit that there is hardly a colored church in any considerable city in this country, which could be said in any sense to represent <em>the best colored society</em>, in which Rhoda Aldgate could not have seen, when she opened her eyes, persons as quietly and as becomingly dressed, as cultivated in tone and as refined in manner, as herself; persons, too, as sensitive to rough contact and as horribly alive as she could be (though they had known it from childhood) to the galling distinctions in this country which insist on <em>levelling down</em> all individuals more or less related to the Africans. So far from the cringing deference which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells paints as exhibited to “the young white lady,” in nine cases out of ten the congregation would have supposed intuitively that she was a quadroon, so far from the unusual was her appearance and complexion. In not a few such colored churches would she have found young women of aspiration and intellectual activity with whom she could affiliate without nausea and from whom she could learn a good many lessons⁠—and, sadly I say it, even more outside the churches whom bitterness at racial inconsistency of white Christians had soured into a silent disbelief of all religion. In either class she would have found no trouble in reaching a heart which could enter into all the agony of her own trial and bitter grief. Nor am I so sure, if she had followed her first gushing impulse to go South and “elevate” the race with whom she had discovered her relationship, that she would have found even them so ready to receive her condescending patronage.</p>
			<p>There are numerous other inadvertent misrepresentations in the book⁠—such as supposing that colored people voluntarily and deliberately prefer to keep to themselves in all public places and that from choice “they have their own neighborhoods, their own churches, their own amusements, their own resorts,”⁠—the intimation that there is a “<em>black</em> voice,” a black character, easy, irresponsible and fond of what is soft and pleasant, a black ideal of art and a black barbaric taste in color, a black affinity⁠—so that in some occult and dreadful way one, only one-sixteenth related and totally foreign by education and environment, can still feel that one-sixteenth race calling her more loudly than the fifteen-sixteenths. I wish to do <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Howells the justice to admit, however, that one feels his blunders to be wholly unintentional and due to the fact that he has studied his subject merely from the outside. With all his matchless powers as a novelist, not even he can yet “think himself imaginatively” into the colored man’s place.</p>
			<p>To my mind the quaintest and truest little bit of portraiture from lowlife that I have read in a long time is the little story that appeared last winter in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">Harpers</i>, of the “Widder Johnsing and how she caught the preacher.” It is told with naive impersonality and appreciative humor, and is quite equal, I think, both in subject and treatment to the best of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Stowe’s New England dialect stories. It is idyllic in its charming simplicity and naturalness, and delightfully fresh in its sparkling wit and delicious humor. We do not resent such pictures as this of our lowly folk⁠—such a homely and honest</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“Pomegranate, which, if cut deep down the middle,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shows a heart within blood tinctured of a <em>veined humanity</em>,”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">is always sweet to the taste and dear to the heart, however plain and humble the setting.</p>
			<p>A longer and more elaborate work, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Harold</i>, published anonymously, comes properly in our group second, the didactic novel. It gives the picture of a black Englishman cultured and refined, brought in painful contact with American⁠—or rather <em>un-American</em>, color prejudice. The point of the book seems to be to show that education for the black man is a curse, since it increases his sensitiveness to the indignities he must suffer in consequence of white barbarity. The author makes Harold, after a futile struggle against American inequalities, disappear into the jungles of Africa, “there to wed a dusky savage,” at the last cursing the day he had ever suspected a broader light or known a higher aspiration; a conclusion which, to my mind, is a most illogical one. If the cultivated black man cannot endure the white man’s barbarity⁠—the cure, it seems to me, would be to cultivate the white man. Civilize both, then each will know what is due from man to man, and that reduces at once to a minimum the friction of their contact.</p>
			<p>In the same rank as <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Harold</i> belongs that improbability of improbabilities, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Doctor Huguet</i>, by the arch-sensationalist, Ignatius Donelly. As its purpose is evidently good, I shall not undertake to review the book. Suffice it to say the plot hinges on the exchange of soul between the body of a black chicken thief and that of a cultivated white gentleman, and sets forth the indignities and wrongs to which the cultured soul, with all its past of refinement and learning, has to submit in consequence of its change of cuticle. The book is an able protest against that snobbishness which elevates complexion into a touchstone of aristocracy and makes the pigment cells of a man’s skin his badge of nobility regardless of the foulness or purity of the soul within; the only adverse criticism from the colored man’s point of view being the selection of a chicken thief as his typical black man; but on the principle of antitheses this may have been artistically necessary.</p>
			<p>I shall pass next to what I consider the most significant contribution to this subject for the last ten years⁠—a poem by Maurice Thompson in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.magazine">New York Independent</i> for January 21, 1892, entitled “A Voodoo Prophecy.” From beginning to end it is full of ghoulish imagery and fine poetic madness. Here are a few stanzas of it:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“I am the prophet of the dusky race,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The poet of wild Africa. Behold,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The midnight vision brooding in my face!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Come near me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">And hear me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">While from my lips the words of Fate are told.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A black and terrible memory masters me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">The shadow and the substance of deep wrong;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>You know the past, hear now what is to be:</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">From the midnight land,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Over sea and sand,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">From the green jungle, hear my Voodoo-song;</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>A tropic heat is in my bubbling veins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Quintessence of all savagery is mine,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The lust of ages ripens in my reins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">And burns</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">And yearns,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Like venom-sap within a noxious vine.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Was I a heathen? Ay, I was⁠—am still</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">A fetish worshipper; but I was free</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To loiter or to wander at my will,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">To leap and dance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">To hurl my lance,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And breathe the air of savage liberty.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You drew me to a higher life, you say;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Ah, drove me, with the lash of slavery!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Am I unmindful? Every cursed day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Of pain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">And chain</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Roars like a torrent in my memory.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You make my manhood whole with ‘equal rights!’</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Poor empty words! Dream you I honor them?⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I who have stood on Freedom’s wildest hights?</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">My Africa,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">I see the day</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When none dare touch thy garment’s lowest hem.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You cannot make me love you with your whine</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of fine repentance. Veil your pallid face</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In presence of the shame that mantles mine;</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Stand</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">At command</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Of the black prophet of the Negro race!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I hate you, and I live to nurse my hate,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Remembering when you plied the slaver’s trade</span>
					<br/>
					<span>In my dear land⁠ ⁠… How patiently I wait</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">The day,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Not far away,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">When all your pride shall shrivel up and fade.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yea, all your whiteness darken under me!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Darken and be jaundiced, and your blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Take in dread humors from my savagery,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Until</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Your will</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Lapse into mine and seal my masterhood.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You, seed of Abel, proud of your descent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And arrogant, because your cheeks are fair,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Within my loins an inky curse is pent,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">To flood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Your blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And stain your skin and crisp your golden hair.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>As you have done by me, so will I do</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">By all the generations of your race;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your snowy limbs, your blood’s patrician blue</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Shall be</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Tainted by me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And I will set my seal upon your face!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Yea, I will dash my blackness down your veins,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And through your nerves my sensuousness I’ll fling;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Your lips, your eyes, shall bear the musty stains</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Of Congo kisses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">While shrieks and hisses</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall blend into the savage songs I sing!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Your temples will I break, your fountains fill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Your cities raze, your fields to deserts turn;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My heathen fires shall shine on every hill,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">And wild beasts roam,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Where stands your home;⁠—</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Even the wind your hated dust shall spurn.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>I will absorb your very life in me,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And mold you to the shape of my desire;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Back through the cycles of all cruelty</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">I will swing you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">And wring you,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And roast you in my passions’ hottest fire.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>You, North and South, you, East and West,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Shall drink the cup your fathers gave to me;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>My back still burns, I bare my bleeding breast,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">I set my face,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">My limbs I brace,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">To make the long, strong fight for mastery.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>My serpent fetish lolls its withered lip</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And bares its shining fangs at thought of this:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I scarce can hold the monster in my grip.</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">So strong is he,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">So eagerly</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">He leaps to meet my precious prophecies.</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>Hark for the coming of my countless host,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">Watch for my banner over land and sea.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The ancient power of vengeance is not lost!</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">Lo! on the sky</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i6">The fire-clouds fly,</span>
					<br/>
					<span class="i1">And strangely moans the windy, weltering sea.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Now this would be poetry if it were only truthful. Simple and sensuous it surely is, but it lacks the third requisite⁠—truth. The Negro is utterly incapable of such vindictiveness. Such concentrated venom might be distilled in the cold Saxon, writhing and chafing under oppression and repression such as the Negro in America has suffered and is suffering. But the black man is in real life only too glad to accept the olive branch of reconciliation. He merely asks to be let alone. To be allowed to pursue his destiny as a free man and an American citizen, to rear and educate his children in peace, to engage in art, science, trades or industries according to his ability⁠—and <em>to go to the wall if he fail</em>. He is willing, if I understand him, to let bygones be bygones. He does not even demand satisfaction for the centuries of his ancestors’ unpaid labor. He asks neither pension, nor dole nor back salaries; but is willing to start from the bottom, all helpless and unprovided for as he is, with absolutely nothing as his stock in trade, with no capital, in a country developed, enriched, and made to blossom through his father’s “sweat and toil,”⁠—with none of the accumulations of ancestors’ labors, with no education or moral training for the duties and responsibilities of freedom; nay, with every power, mental, moral, and physical, emasculated by a debasing slavery⁠—he is willing, even glad to take his place in the lists alongside his oppressors, who have had every advantage, to be tried with them by their own standards, and to ask no quarter from them or high Heaven to palliate or excuse the ignominy of a defeat.</p>
			<p>The “Voodoo Prophecy” has no interest then as a picture of the black, but merely as a revelation of the white man. Maurice Thompson in penning this portrait of the Negro, has, unconsciously it may be, laid bare his own soul⁠—its secret dread and horrible fear. And this, it seems to me, is the key to the Southern situation, the explanation of the apparent heartlessness and cruelty of some, and the stolid indifference to atrocity on the part of others, before which so many of us have stood paralyzed in dumb dismay. The Southerner is not a cold-blooded villain. Those of us who have studied the genus in its native habitat can testify that his impulses are generous and kindly, and that while the South presents a solid phalanx of iron resistance to the Negro’s advancement, still as individuals to individuals they are warmhearted and often even tender. And just here is the difference between the Southerner and his more philosophical, less sentimental Northern brother. The latter in an abstract metaphysical way rather wants you to have all the rights that belong to you. He thinks it better for the country, better for him that justice, universal justice be done. But he doesn’t care to have the blacks, in the concrete, too near him. He doesn’t know them and doesn’t want to know them. He really can’t understand how the Southerner could have let those little cubs get so close to him as they did in the old days⁠—nursing from the same bottle and feeding at the same breast.</p>
			<p>To the Southerner, on the other hand, race antipathy and color-phobia <em>as such</em> does not exist. Personally, there is hardly a man of them but knows, and has known from childhood, some black fellow whom he loves as dearly as if he were white, whom he regards as indispensable to his own pleasures, and for whom he would break every commandment in the decalogue to save him from any general disaster. But our Bourbon seems utterly incapable of generalizing his few ideas. He would die for A or B, but suddenly becomes utterly impervious to every principle of logic when you ask for the simple golden rule to be applied to the class of which A or B is one. Another fact strikes me as curious. A Southern white man’s regard for his black friend varies in inverse ratio to the real distance between them in education and refinement. Puck expresses it⁠—“I can get on a great deal better with a nigger than I can with a Negro.” And <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Douglass puts it: “Let a colored man be out at elbows and toes and halfway into the gutter and there is no prejudice against him; but let him respect himself and be a man and Southern whites can’t abide to ride in the same car with him.”</p>
			<p>Why this anomaly? Is it pride? Ordinarily, congeniality increases with similarity in taste and manners. Is it antipathy to color? It does not exist. The explanation is the white man’s dread dimly shadowed out in this “Voodoo Prophecy” of Maurice Thompson, and fed and inspired by such books as Minden Armais and a few wild theorizers who have nothing better to do with their time than spend it advocating the fusion of races as a plausible and expedient policy. Now I believe there are two ideas which master the Southern white man and incense him against the black race. On this point he is a monomaniac. In the face of this feeling he would not admit he was convinced of the axioms of Geometry. The one is personal and present, the fear of Negro political domination. The other is for his posterity⁠—the future horror of being lost as a race in this virile and vigorous black race. Relieve him of this nightmare and he becomes “as gentle as the sucking dove.” With that dread delusion maddening him he would drive his sword to the hilt in the tender breast of his darling child, did he fancy that through her the curse would come.</p>
			<p>Now argument is almost supersensible with a monomaniac. What is most needed is a sedative for the excited nerves, and then a mental tonic to stimulate the power of clear perception and truthful cerebration. The Southern patient needs to be brought to see, by the careful and cautious injection of cold facts and by the presentation of well selected object lessons that so far as concerns his first named horror of black supremacy politically, the usual safeguards of democracy are in the hands of intelligence and wealth in the South as elsewhere. The weapons of fair argument and persuasion, the precautionary bulwark of education and justice, the unimpeachable supremacy and insuperable advantage of intelligence and discipline over mere numbers⁠—are all in his reach. It is to his interest to help make the black peasant an intelligent and self-respecting citizen. No section can thrive under the incubus of an illiterate, impoverished, cheerless and hopeless peasantry. Let the South once address herself in good faith to the improvement of the condition of her laboring classes, let her give but a tithe of the care and attention which are bestowed in the North on its mercurial and inflammable importations, let her show but the disposition in her relative poverty merely to utter the benediction, <em>Be ye warmed and fed and educated</em>, even while she herself has not the wherewithal to emulate the Pullman villages and the Carnegie munificence, let her but give him a fair wage and an honest reckoning and a kindly Godspeed⁠—and she will find herself in possession of the most tractable laborer, the most faithful and reliable henchman, the most invaluable cooperator and friendly vassal of which this or any country can boast.</p>
			<p>So far as regards the really less sane idea that amicable relations subsisting between the races may promote their ultimate blending and loss of identity, it hardly seems necessary to refute it. Blending of races in the aggregate is simply an unthinkable thought, and the union of individuals can never fall out by accident or haphazard. There must be the deliberate wish and intention on each side; and the average black man in this country is as anxious to preserve his identity and transmit his type as is the average white man. In any case, hybridity is in no sense dependent on sectional or national amity. Oppression and outrage are not the means to chain the affections. Cupid, who knows no bolt or bars, is more wont to be stimulated with romantic sympathy towards a forbidden object unjustly persecuted. The sensible course is to remove those silly and unjust barriers which protect nothing and merely call attention to the possibilities of law-breaking, and depend instead on religion and common sense to guide, control and direct in the paths of purity and right reason.</p>
			<p>The froth and foam, the sticks and debris at the water-top may have an uncertain movement, but as deep calleth unto deep the mighty ocean swell is always true to the tides; and whatever the fluctuations along the ragged edge between the races, the home instinct is sufficiently strong with each to hold the great mass true to its attractions. If Maurice Thompson’s nightmare vision is sincere on his part, then, it has no objective reality; ’tis merely a hideous phantasm bred of his own fevered and jaundiced senses; if he does not believe in it himself, it was most unkind and uncalled for to publish abroad such inflaming and irritating fabrications.</p>
			<p>After this cursory glance at a few contributions which have peculiarly emphasized one phase of our literature during the last decade or two, I am brought to the conclusion that an authentic portrait, at once aesthetic and true to life, presenting the black man as a free American citizen, not the humble slave of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Uncle Tom’s Cabin</i>⁠—but the <em>man</em>, divinely struggling and aspiring yet tragically warped and distorted by the adverse winds of circumstance, has not yet been painted. It is my opinion that the canvas awaits the brush of the colored man himself. It is a pathetic⁠—a fearful arraignment of America’s conditions of life, that instead of that enrichment from the years and days, the summers and springs under which, as Browning says,</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span>“The flowers turn double and the leaves turn flowers,”⁠—</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="continued">the black man’s native and original flowers have in this country been all hardened and sharpened into thorns and spurs. In literature we have no artists for art’s sake. Albery <abbr epub:type="z3998:given-name">A.</abbr> Whitman in “Twasinta’s Seminoles” and “Not a Man and Yet a Man” is almost the only poet who has attempted a more sustained note than the lyrics of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Harper, and even that note is almost a wail.</p>
			<p>The fact is, a sense of freedom in mind as well as in body is necessary to the appreciative and inspiring pursuit of the beautiful. A bird cannot warble out his fullest and most joyous notes while the wires of his cage are pricking and cramping him at every heart beat. His tones become only the shrill and poignant protest of rage and despair. And so the black man’s vexations and chafing environment, even since his physical emancipation has given him speech, has goaded him into the eloquence and fire of oratory rather than the genial warmth and cheery glow of either poetry or romance. And pity ’tis, ’tis true. A race that has produced for America the only folklore and folk songs of native growth, a race which has grown the most original and unique assemblage of fable and myth to be found on the continent, a race which has suggested and inspired almost the only distinctive American note which could chain the attention and charm the ear of the outside world⁠—has as yet found no mouthpiece of its own to unify and perpetuate its wondrous whisperings⁠—no painter-poet to distil in the alembic of his own imagination the gorgeous dyes, the luxuriant juices of this rich and tropical vegetation. It was the glory of Chaucer that he justified the English language to itself⁠—that he took the homely and hitherto despised Saxon elements and ideas, and lovingly wove them into an artistic product which even Norman conceit and uppishness might be glad to acknowledge and imitate. The only man who is doing the same for Negro folklore is one not to the manner born. Joel Chandler Harris has made himself rich and famous by simply standing around among the black railroad hands and cotton pickers of the South and compiling the simple and dramatic dialogues which fall from their lips. What I hope to see before I die is a black man honestly and appreciatively portraying both the Negro as he is, and the white man, occasionally, as seen from the Negro’s standpoint.</p>
			<p>There is an old proverb “The devil is always painted <em>black</em>⁠—by white painters.” And what is needed, perhaps, to reverse the picture of the lordly man slaying the lion, is for the lion to turn painter.</p>
			<p>Then too we need the calm clear judgment of ourselves and of others born of a disenchantment similar to that of a little girl I know in the South, who was once being laboriously held up over the shoulders of a surging throng to catch her first glimpse of a real live president. “Why Nunny,” she cried half reproachfully, as she strained her little neck to see⁠—“<em>It’s nuffin but a man!</em>”</p>
			<p>When we have been sized up and written down by others, we need not feel that the last word is said and the oracles sealed. “It’s nuffin but a man.” And there are many gifts the giftie may gie us, far better than seeing ourselves as others see us⁠—and one is that of Bion’s maxim “<em>Know Thyself</em>.” Keep true to your own ideals. Be not ashamed of what is homely and your own. Speak out and speak honestly. Be true to yourself and to the message God and Nature meant you to deliver. The young David cannot fight in Saul’s unwieldy armor. Let him simply therefore gird his loins, take up his own parable and tell this would-be great American nation “<em>A chile’s amang ye takin’ notes</em>;” and when men act the part of cowards or wild beasts, this great silent but open-eyed constituency has a standard by which they are being tried. Know thyself, and know those around at their true weight of solid intrinsic manhood without being dazzled by the fact that littleness of soul is often gilded with wealth, power and intellect. There can be no nobility but that of soul, and no catalogue of adventitious circumstances can wipe out the stain or palliate the meanness of inflicting one ruthless, cruel wrong. ’Tis not only safer, but nobler, grander, diviner,</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
				<p>
					<span class="i8">“To be that which we destroy</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Than, by destruction, dwell in doubtful joy.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>With this platform to stand on we can with clear eye weigh what is written and estimate what is done and ourselves paint what is true with the calm spirit of those who know their cause is right and who believe there is a God who judgeth the nations.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
